[TT-16831] docs: add OpenTelemetry metrics pages and restructure metrics section (#1808)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/metrics/default-metrics.mdx

keywords: "OpenTelemetry, Metrics, RED Metrics, Request Duration, Go Runtime, Prometheus, Grafana, API Observability"
sidebarTitle: "Default Metrics"
---

## Availability

| Component | Version | Edition |
| :-------- | :------ | :------- |
| Tyk Gateway | Available since [v5.13.0](/developer-support/release-notes/gateway#5-13-0-release-notes) | Community & Enterprise |

## Default Gateway Metrics

When `opentelemetry.metrics.enabled` is set to `true`, Tyk Gateway automatically exports three groups of metrics, no additional configuration required:

1. [Request metrics](#request-metrics): Rate, Errors, and Duration (RED) for every API request
2. [Go runtime metrics](#go-runtime-metrics): Memory, goroutines, and GC health
3. [Configuration state metrics](#configuration-state-metrics): API/policy load counts and reload events

All metrics are exported as OpenTelemetry-semantic-convention-compliant instruments and include [resource attributes](#resource-attributes) that identify the gateway instance.

### Request Metrics

> These four instruments cover the standard RED signals for every API proxied by the gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These four instruments cover the standard RED signals for every API proxied by the Gateway.
```

| Metric Name | Type | Unit | Description |
|-------------|------|------|-------------|

> | `http.server.request.duration` | Histogram | seconds | End-to-end request latency (client to gateway to upstream and back). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `http.server.request.duration` | Histogram | seconds | End-to-end request latency (client to Gateway to upstream and back). |
```

#### Default Dimensions

Default dimensions vary by instrument:

| Instrument | `http.request.method` | `http.response.status_code` | `tyk.api.id` | `tyk.response_flag` |
|-----------|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| `http.server.request.duration` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `tyk.gateway.request.duration` | Yes | - | Yes | Yes |
| `tyk.upstream.request.duration` | Yes | - | Yes | Yes |
| `tyk.api.requests.total` | Yes | Yes | Yes | - |

| Dimension | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `http.request.method` | HTTP request method (`GET`, `POST`, etc.). |
| `tyk.api.id` | The Tyk API ID. |
| `http.response.status_code` | HTTP response status code (`200`, `404`, `500`, etc.). |
| `tyk.response_flag` | Tyk 3-letter error classification code (e.g., `AKI`, `URS`, `CBO`), or the HTTP status code string (e.g., `"200"`) for successful requests or when error classification is absent. See the [full list of response flags](/api-management/logs#error-classification). |

You can add more dimensions to any instrument using [custom metrics](/api-management/metrics/custom-metrics).

### Go Runtime Metrics

> These metrics are exported automatically and reflect the health of the Go runtime inside the gateway process. They can be disabled by setting `runtime_metrics: false` in the metrics config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These metrics are exported automatically and reflect the health of the Go runtime inside the Gateway process. They can be disabled by setting `runtime_metrics: false` in the metrics config.
```

| Metric Name | Type | Unit | Description |
|-------------|------|------|-------------|
| `go.memory.used` | Gauge | bytes | Current heap memory in use. |
| `go.memory.limit` | Gauge | bytes | Soft memory limit set via `GOMEMLIMIT`. |
| `go.memory.allocated` | Gauge | bytes | Total bytes allocated to the heap. |
| `go.memory.allocations` | Counter | bytes | Cumulative bytes allocated since startup. |
| `go.memory.gc.goal` | Gauge | bytes | Target heap size for the next GC cycle. |
| `go.goroutine.count` | Gauge | goroutines | Number of active goroutines. Useful for detecting goroutine leaks. |
| `go.processor.limit` | Gauge | threads | Number of OS threads available (`GOMAXPROCS`). |
| `go.config.gogc` | Gauge | percent | GC target percentage (`GOGC` env var). |

### Configuration State Metrics

> These metrics reflect the operational state of the gateway's loaded configuration. They are useful for detecting silent configuration failures, for example, alerting when the number of loaded APIs drops unexpectedly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These metrics reflect the operational state of the Gateway's loaded configuration. They are useful for detecting silent configuration failures, for example, alerting when the number of loaded APIs drops unexpectedly.
```

| Metric Name | Type | Unit | Description |
|-------------|------|------|-------------|
| `tyk.gateway.apis.loaded` | Gauge | APIs | Number of API definitions currently loaded and active. |
| `tyk.gateway.policies.loaded` | Gauge | policies | Number of policies currently loaded and active. |
| `tyk.gateway.config.reload.total` | Counter | reloads | Cumulative number of configuration reload events since startup. |
| `tyk.gateway.config.reload.duration` | Histogram | seconds | Time taken to complete each configuration reload cycle. |

## Resource Attributes

> Every metric exported from a gateway instance carries resource attributes, metadata that identifies the source. These are set once at startup and attached to all metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every metric exported from a Gateway instance carries resource attributes, metadata that identifies the source. These are set once at startup and attached to all metrics.
```

### Tyk-Specific Resource Attributes

| Attribute | Always Present | Example | Description |
|-----------|---------------|---------|-------------|

> | `tyk.gw.id` | Yes | `gw-prod-eu-west-1-a` | Unique gateway node ID. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.id` | Yes | `gw-prod-eu-west-1-a` | Unique Gateway ID. |
```

> | `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Yes | `true` | Whether the gateway is running as an edge/dataplane node. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.dataplane` | Yes | `true` | Whether the Gateway is running in a distributed Data Plane |
```

> | `tyk.gw.group.id` | No | `prod-eu-west-1` | Present only for edge (dataplane) gateways, identifies the group. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.group.id` | No | `prod-eu-west-1` | Present only for Data Plane Gateways, identifies the group. |
```

> | `tyk.gw.tags` | No | `["region:eu", "env:prod"]` | Present only when the gateway has segment tags configured. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tyk.gw.tags` | No | `["region:eu", "env:prod"]` | Present only when the Gateway has [segment tags](/api-management/multiple-environments#what-is-api-sharding-) configured. |
```

          - set(attributes["tyk_gw_id"], resource.attributes["tyk.gw.id"]) where resource.attributes["tyk.gw.id"] != nil
          - set(attributes["tyk_gw_tags"], resource.attributes["tyk.gw.tags"]) where resource.attributes["tyk.gw.tags"] != nil
          - set(attributes["tyk_gw_dataplane"], resource.attributes["tyk.gw.dataplane"]) where resource.attributes["tyk.gw.dataplane"] != nil
```

This allows PromQL queries like:

```promql
# All metrics from a specific gateway node
{tyk_gw_id="gw-prod-eu-west-1-a"}

# Compare request rates across gateways in an edge group
sum by (tyk_gw_id) (
  rate(tyk_api_requests_total{tyk_gw_group_id="edge-eu-west"}[5m])
)
```

Without this setting, resource attributes are available via the `target_info` metric and can be joined in PromQL.

## Exemplars

Exemplars are sample observations attached to histogram metric data points that carry the active trace context (specifically the `trace_id` and `span_id` of the request that produced the measurement). They create a direct, clickable link from an aggregated metric to the specific trace that caused an anomaly.

### How they work in Tyk

> No gateway configuration is required. When OpenTelemetry tracing is enabled and a histogram metric (such as `http.server.request.duration`) is recorded during an active sampled request, the OTel Go SDK automatically attaches the current trace and span IDs to the observation. Exemplars are only attached for sampled requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When OpenTelemetry tracing is enabled and a histogram metric (such as `http.server.request.duration`) is recorded during an active sampled request, the OTel Go SDK automatically attaches the current trace and span IDs to the observation. Exemplars are only attached for sampled requests.
```
